=== PAGE 1 ===
TES
eS lll—s arr?
jt Chara sive elements of these devices sense an increase in the

etic respo! !
id around a conductor due to the sudden increase in current during a

ndition. Since the magnetic field around the conductor builds instant
an de-energize the circuit almost instantaneously. oe

2229
Sess

nel .
circuit CO
jrcuit preaker &

p circuit breakers are covered in more detail in later years of your

s-tri]
antarreous
ie training
“time Circuit Breakers

inverse” ie circuit breakers, also known as thermal-magnetic circuit breakers, provide
averse" from both overload and short-circuit overcurrent conditions. A bimetallic
roa element works similarly to time-delay fuses and gives the breaker inverse-time
wiping tics to allow brief, overload conditions. In the event of a short circuit, an
oerromagnetic trip element provides instantaneous action.
dl
it breakers found in panelboards for homes, commercial buildings, and

t circ 5 = aa
ye plants are inverse-time circuit breakers.

industrial
Figure 27 illustrates the basic components of an inverse-time circuit breaker.
Handle in "ON" Position

Handle in "TRIP" Trip Mechanism

Position by
i Bimetallic Strip
Q)_ tandtein OFF” i
Position ae

Movable Electromagnet
Contact Arm Sensing Element
(Open) y | Spring

Movable
Contact Arm
(Closed)



=== PAGE 2 ===
30

NOTES

Overload Characteristics

Inverse-time circuit breakers employ a bimetallic strip made of two dissimj

bonded together to sense overloads. The two metals have different th, Similar Metals
characteristics, so the bimetallic strip bends when heated. Overload condi EXP ansion
more heat in the bimetallic strip and cause it to bend. After it bends a itions Create
distance, the strip contacts the tripper bar, activating the trip mechanism as ithe’
in Figure 28. illustrateg

Operating Mechanism

Handle in "TRIP" Position Released by Trip Mechanism

Bimetallic str
, P bey
to trip the bréagggied

Figure 28 - Thermal-magnetic circuit breaker tripped on overload.

When the circuit breaker’s contacts open, the bimetallic strip cools, and it returns to its
original condition. This allows a circuit breaker to be manually reset once the overload
condition is corrected.

030204c02.docx

®



=== PAGE 3 ===
circu

oft" roug . Ra + A
Seat f1OW t eal operating conditions, or during minor overloads, the opposing

nder nOnn
U not sufficient
are NO acuit OCC

Figu
flows through the blow-apart contacts also flows through a conductor in
is positioned close to the electromagnetic sensing element, as
current levels, the magnetic field surrounding this

Is in the sensing element, which contacts the tripper bar and releases the trip

in Figure 30B.

The current that
the circuit breaker that
figure 30A i

conductor pul s
mechanism, aS shown i

Handle in "ON"
Position

it ae the circuit breaker’s blow-apart contacts creates opposing

re 29 - Magnetic fields around blow-apart contacts.

Ilustrates. At fault

NOTE
lagnetic

to separate the contacts, as Figure 29A demonstrates. H.
urs, these opposing magnetic fields increase significantly. Sali

in Figure 29B.

Operating Mechanism Held Handle in "TRIP"
in Place by Trip Mechanism Position

fault current
begins to flow.



=== PAGE 4 ===
NOTES

The combined actions of the blow-apart contacts and th
electromagnetic sensing element result in the rapid inte sd ote
O01

is, the less time it tal

the construction

Because the magnetic forces are proportional to the of th
‘i curr le fa
i kes to interrupt the current. In the ve the greater wits
mechanism is actuated within three to five milliseconds of a short

Manufacturers may use methods different than described

components of circuit breakers; however, the basic
characteristics are the same.

Ment of
mn

and arrangement of the short-circuit and pane for
Overload —
operating

Trip-Free Mechanism

Circuit breaker handles act as the control device that switches the circuit
often used to reset the automatic tripping function after the break ete ton or
Rule 14-300 1) requires circuit breakers to be in oe rom

overcurrent condition.
means that an overcurrent
locked in the on position.

030204c02.docx

condition will trip the breaker even if the handle j
le ish



=== PAGE 5 ===
Four and Five Activity NOTES

eactive
pjectY™ two (2) types of overcurrent conditions?
what at?

) : a)
b)

of the two overcurrent conditions cause more current to flow?
which

What are the two (2) current ratings for overcurrent devices?
a

a)
b)

4, Ashort-circuit pathhasa___—_——_simpedance than a normal circuit path.
: a) Higher
| b) Lower

5, What are the two (2) basic protective devices used to protect conductors
and equipment?

b)

6. Which of the two basic protective devices can provide both overcurrent and
overload protection?

. Anon-time-delay fuse can clear a short-circuit condition in less than of

an electrical cycle and clear a high short-circuit current in less than a of

an electrical cycle.

Describe the sequence of events that occur to a time-delay fuse responding to
a short-circuit condition.



=== PAGE 6 ===
9. What are the two (2) main types of circuit breakers?

a) )

b)

10. Which of the two main types of circuit breakers has an electromagnetic responsiy,
e

element only?

11. Which mechanism of an inverse-time circuit breaker responds to the extra heat

caused by a prolonged overload condition?

030204c02,docx



=== PAGE 7 ===
pjective six ee,
ave completed this objective, you will be able to

rs that determine short-circuit currents.

fault current Values
ort-circuit conditions, the fault current may be thousands of amper id
res and must

puring 8 t devi (
d safely. Overcurrent devices must have an interrupti it
es Pefies x ‘ing Parr
wn short-circuit current that the device can safely SEEMED indicates the
e circuit or equipment. If a fault current exceeds a per eons
erupting

mi
damage 10 : UNE
the device May rupture, destroying itself and damaging the equipment around i
‘ound it.

capacitY>
‘The fuse in Figure 31 can safely interrupt a current of 200 000 i
2600 V alternating current (ac) circuit or 100 000 A (100 kA) A cant?

current (de) circuit.

igo

Figure 31 - Interrupting rating.

NOTES



=== PAGE 8 ===
—

| 36

Factors Affecting the Maximum Available Fault Curre,
To determine if the interrupting rating of an overcurrent device nt
system in which it is installed, you must know the maximum ay,
can be supplied by the source (for example, a transformer). The
current is affected by
The kilo-volt-amperes (kVA) rating of the transformer,
The voltage rating of the transformer secondary supplyin,
«The percent impedance voltage of the transformer.

is large en
ailable faut for the

mas
‘aximum Walla at

faut

ig the Circuit, an d

Kilo-volt-amperes, ot kilo-volt-amps (kVA), is the unit of measurement
energy capacity of transformers. The higher this rating is, the more en
transformer can feed into a short circuit.

used for
‘ergy the be

Following Ohm’s law, the amount of fault current that will flow during a short cireyj
affected by the voltage rating on the secondary of the transformer supplying pipe is
The percent impedance voltage, or simply percent impedance, is the Percentage pe
normal rated primary voltage that must be applied to the transformer to cause full ee
current (FLC) to flow in the short-circuited secondary windings. It is expressed as a
numeric value on the nameplate of a transformer with the symbols %/Z or %Z. For
example, %IZ = 5%. The lower the percent impedance rating, the higher the available
fault current.

Transformer ratings, percent impedance, and short-circuit calculations are covered in
more detail in later years of your technical training.

While the maximum available fault current describes how much current could flow
during a short-circuit condition, the actual amount of current that flows during the fault
depends on the impedance of the fault path. A fault caused by a single strand ofa live
conductor contacting a metal enclosure has more impedance (and less fault current) than
a fault caused by a metal tool short-circuiting the busbars in a panelboard. The closer the —
fault is to the source, the lower the impedance will be since the length of the fault *"
is shorter. As the distance from the source increases, the impedance of the
also increases.

The fault current may also be affected by motors connected to the
act as generators when decelerating and can increase the av:

030204c02.docx



=== PAGE 9 ===
ive

oa NOTES
jer impo rtant to know the interrupting Tating of a fuse or breaker?

| jt the three (3) factors that affect the maximum available short-circuit current in
* 4 circuit.

a)
b)

°)

3, Describe how the distance of a short circuit from the source affects the amount
of fault current.



=== PAGE 10 ===
38

jaa

Self-Test
1. What is the function of the holding contacts in a basic stop/start control circuit?
a) To de-energize the motor during an overload condition ©

b) To keep the motor running when the start button is released
c) To keep the motor running when the stop button is released
d) To allow the motor to be started from more than one location

2. Ifan additional stop button is to be connected to an existing stop/start control circuit,
how would it be connected?
a) In parallel with the start button
b) In series with the other stop button
c) Inseries with the holding contacts
d) In parallel with the other stop button

3. What is a start push button an example of?
a) Manually operated, momentary control device
b) Manually operated, maintained control device
c) Automatically operated, momentary control device
d) Automatically operated, maintained control device

4. Which of the following is a non-contact pilot device?
a) Float switch
b) Limit switch
c) Toggle switch
d) Proximity switch D))

5. Which of the following is the correct symbol of a normally open limit switch? |
SS :
a) b)
2,
Cc) d) nm

Figure 32

6. What will an inverse-time circuit breaker p
a) Overloads only
b) Short circuits only
c) Continuous operation
d) Overloads and short circuits

(030204c02.doex



=== PAGE 11 ===
tl
. wh the preaker ™
») ior opto"
The preaker mu:

) a breaker will a

1

“circuit curre
shorter ondary voltage

a)
b) Supply tran

‘Ampacity of
d) Impedance of the

9, A motor iS expected to

pen when locked in the
11 guard against nuisance tripping

st trip, even if locked or held in the closed iti
low inrush current to pass through wihout ipo

F t by the term “ free” when applied to breaker?
arisen? 5 ust not nA

cessors wi

¢ following is not a factor in determining the maximi "
nt in a system? lum available

sformer kVA rating
f the supply conductors
possible short-circuit path

a) Always run at FLC.

b) Drawa high current at start-up.

¢) Draw the lowest current at start-up.

d) Never have the start current exceed the FLC.

0, What is a fault current caused by?
a) Electrical overloading

| b) Mechanical overloading
c) Alow impedance path to ground
d) Ahigh impedance path to ground


=== PAGE 12 ===
=

Objective One Activity Answers
Li
25
Ss

Objective Two Activity Answers
1G

Objective Three Activity Answers
ibs

Normally closed push buttons are used for stopping.
Normally open push buttons are used for starting. @

The relay coil would be energized only while the start button contacts were closed,
The relay coil would be de-energized when the start button was released, since the
holding contacts would be in parallel with the stop button.

Multiple start buttons must be connected in parallel with each other.

Multiple stop buttons must be connected in series with each other.

a) Maintained
b) Momentary

A start push-button switch used in parallel with holding contacts for a stop/start
station is a momentary contact switch.

A standard single-pole toggle switch is a maintained contact switch.

a) True; automatic pilot devices convert a change in the medium they are sensing
into a change in the state of a set of contacts. ®

a) Float

b) Pressure

c) Limit

d) Temperature

a) No

The switch contacts are in the float of a tethered bulb float switch. In the lever type,
they are located at the termination point of the lever.

With a limit switch, something (a lever, cam, rod, or other actuator) must contact the
object or material being sensed. A proximity switch does not need to make contact. |

030204c02,docx



=== PAGE 13 ===
¢ Four and Five Activity Answers

‘active if
) Sie conditions
ad conditions

overlo lly have higher current values.

short circuits tyP) be
Continuous et
)

3 ting rating
) niae

p) Lower B
) Overcurrent devices
») overload devices
rent devices provide both short-circuit and overload protection.
cul

e delay fuse can clear a short-circuit condition in less than half of an
ele and clear a high short-circuit current in less than a quarter of an

6, over

1A non-tim
"electrical ¢:

electrical cycle.

During a short circuit, the fuse link vaporizes, and the surrounding arc-quenching

filler extinguishes the arcing current.

a) Inverse-time circuit breaker

b) Instantaneous-trip circuit breaker

10, An instantaneous-trip circuit breaker is a magnetic only device.

11. The bimetal strip of an inverse-time circuit breaker responds to overload conditions.

Objective Six Activity Answers

1. You must know whether the overcurrent device can safely interrupt the fault current
available in the system or the circuit in which it is to be installed. An overcurrent
device with an interrupting rating lower than the available fault current in the system
could rupture when it opens during a short-circuit condition.

* a) Kilo-volt-amperes (kVA) rating of the supply transformer
») Secondary voltage rating of the supply transformer

°) Percentage impedance (IZ) of the supply transformer

The further the short

§ circuit is from the source, the lower the fault current will be

ince the impedance of the fault path will be higher.



=== PAGE 14 ===
1. b)
b)
a)
d)
a)

yR YY

)
c)
°)
b)
10. c)

he fe Se

(030204c02.docx

Self-Test Answers

To keep the motor running when the start button is released
In series with the other stop button

Manually operated, momentary control device

Proximity switch

The normally open limit switch symbol is as follows:

2
Figure 33 - Response a).
Overloads and short circuits
The breaker must trip, even if locked or held in the closed position.
Ampacity of the supply conductors
Draw a high current at start-up.

A low impedance path to ground

