=== PAGE 1 ===
LEARNING RESoURC:
° e @ FoR SkiLtED TRADERS -

ELECTRICIAN
Pilot and Overcurrent

Devices

iO) 2"4 Edition

Second Period ne
Magnetic Controls and Switching Circuits

v



=== PAGE 2 ===
Table of Contents

objective One...
Basic Stop/Start Motor Control Devies
re Stop/Start Stations th

Multip!
objective One Activity

objective ™

objecti

Objective ree.
‘Automatic Pilot Devices

Objective Three Activity.
Objectives Four and Five

Basic Protection Requirements
Objectives Four and Five Activity
Objective Six.

Fault Current Values
Objective Six Activity.
Self-Test,

Objective One Activity Answers
Objective Two Activity a,
Objective Three Activity Answers.
Objectives Four and Five Activity An:

cove Six Activity Aaa ea
Self-Test Answers



=== PAGE 3 ===
a ———
pilot and Overcurrent Devices

Rationale
Why is it important for you to learn this skill?

There are several aspects of motor branch circuits that differentiate them from

general-use branch circuits, such as circuits used for lighting. Lighting circuits and motor
circuits both need some means to turn the load on and off, and both need overcurrent
protection, but the operational characteristics of motors tend to require special
considerations that do not apply to lighting.

It is important to be able to identify various control devices commonly used for motor
control, and how they are connected to achieve the desired operation. It is also important
to understand the factors that affect the overcurrent protection required for motors.

Outcome
When you have completed this module, you will be able to

Describe the operation of motor protective devices.

@ Objectives
1. Identify the type of push buttons (NO or NC) used for stopping and starting and how

they would be connected for multiple station operation.

Identify and describe the types of maintained and momentary pilot devices.

Describe the operation of automatic pilot devices.

Describe overcurrent protection devices.

Describe the protection characteristics of fuses and breakers.

Identify the factors that determine short-circuit currents.

Si he Ne

Prerequisites

For you to understand pilot devices and control circuits,

following modules: 2
* 030104e: Switching Circuits
* 030104f: Relays and Controls



=== PAGE 4 ===
Introduction inom .
i tion of a stop/start control circuit f
is module explains the operatic a
aeater ese simple schematics, and shows how stop/start buttons ane
st Sntaets connect with respect to each other. Maintained and momen
presented with descriptions of how automatic pilot devices are inco,
control circuits.

The basic ratings, construction, and ‘operation of overcurrent devices such ag
circuit breakers are also introduced in the module. 4

NOTE

In this module, you will see the terms normally open (NO) and
normally closed (NC). In industry, this may be expressed in the
following ways:
* Normally open: N.O., N/O, and NOC
© Normally closed: N.C., N/C, and NCC

Resources
* Canadian Electrical Code, Part I (26th Edition)


=== PAGE 5 ===
Objective One
¢ When you have completed this objective, you will be able to

Basic Stop/Start Motor Control Devices

Motors are often controlled using simple stop/start stations; they contain a stop button
and a start button as shown in Figure 1A. Figure 1B displays the contacts that are
connected to these buttons. Figure 1C illustrates how these buttons (contacts) appear on a
standard schematic diagram.

Normally Open Contact, " Pee Normally Closed Contact

For the Start Button =A - For the Stop Button

[e) °
Normally Open Contact Normally Closed Contact
For the Start Button c For the Stop Button

Figure 1 - Stop/start station.



=== PAGE 6 ===
Push Button Operation
Understanding how the stop and start buttons work or change state j
designing circuits and troubleshooting circuit issues. mats ©Ssential tg
Figure 2A shows start and stop buttons with nothing activating th >
start button being activated (pressed) by a user. The momentary pa Fi
position during this time. When the activation is removed—in thi. lake Contact ta 1
pressing the button—the contact returns to its normal position as inte the user @ 8
igure 24 Ps

030204c02.docx


=== PAGE 7 ===
Figure 3A portray

aes ane ae eae and stop button with nothing activating them. Figure 3B shows

changed BoaitGh Me ane by a user. The normally closed momentary break contact
ing this time. When the activation is removed—in this case, the user

stops pressing the button—t it iti
Teoh the contact returns to its normal position pictured in



=== PAGE 8 ===
Basic Stop/Start Control Circuit

Figure 4 shows a schematic diagram illustrating how these Push butt ens
achieve stop/start control. The Mi circle represents the contactor Coil in pe
and the normally open contacts labelled M; are the holding contacts contra id ter
contactor coil. You might also see holding contacts referred to 8S seal-in led by the
contacts, or maintaining contacts. Contacts, P

The normally closed OL (overload) contacts are part of the over
housed in the motor starter. The operation of the overload devic
discussed in detail in the Motor Starters module.

load device :
fi and ‘
© and its Contacts Will be

Ly

Start
Bile a
M,

Figure 4 - Basic stop/start control circuit with holding or hold-in circuit,

Stop

Figure 5 demonstrates a physical layout of the control circuit and the motor starter which —
is comprised of the contactor and overload relay. The Li, L2, Ls, T:, To, and T;
conductors show the power circuit supplying the motor.

L, bs

030204c02.doex



=== PAGE 9 ===
Pressing the start button creates a path for the current to flow. The shaded line in Figure 6
indicates the path that current takes the instant the start button is pushed. Current flows
through Coil Mi, which creates an electromagnet.

L, Ly

Figure 6 - Pushing the start button.

The electromagnet created by energizing the M; coil causes the armature in the contactor
to move and change the states of its associated contacts. As a result, the holding contacts
close to provide a second path for current to flow to the coil, as shown in Figure 7. The
power contacts that control the motor also close, and the motor starts.

Ly

Figure 7 - Holding contacts close.



=== PAGE 10 ===
NOTE

-< released, aS d
the start button is rec”
maintained through the holding aay and
holding contacts and the power con!

To de-energize the coil and stop the motor,
the stop button interrupts the current flow an
electromagnet effect to cease and all contacts

in Figure 9.
L,

ts remain cl

af

Figure 8 - Start button released.
the stop button must be pressed. P ‘
d de-energizes the coil. This causes

onstrated in Figure 8, the current patt
atte
is

the coil remains energized.
Josed, and the motor iste

Release

M,

to revert to their normal state, as



=== PAGE 11 ===
Multiple Stop/Start Stations head

¢ When a motor is required to be controlled from more than one location, additional
stop/start push-button stations must be incorporated into the control circuit. It is
important to understand how the additional stop and start buttons are connected to
achieve the correct sequence of operation.

Connecting Multiple Stop/Start Stations

To break (or open) a circuit from more than one location, the stop push buttons must be
connected in series, as shown in Figure 10.

To make (or close) a circuit from more than one location, the start push buttons must be
connected in parallel with each other and the holding contacts, as illustrated in Figure 10.

L, Ly

€ M

Figure 10 - Multiple stop and start push-button switch connections.

Any number of stop/start stations can be connected into a motor control circuit, as long as
the stop buttons are connected in series with each other and the start buttons are
connected in parallel with each other.



=== PAGE 12 ===
Objective One Activity
1. What type of momentary contact push-button switch is used for ‘ a ‘

t

4. How must start buttons be connected for multiple stations?

How must stop buttons be connected for multiple stations?

030204c02,doox



=== PAGE 13 ===
Objective Two

When you have completed this objective, you will be able to

Identify and describe the types of maintained and momentary pilot devices.

Pilot Devices

A pilot device signals a change in condition by opening or closing a set of contacts. These
devices can be used to control a relay or the contactor of a magnetic motor starter. The
behaviour of the contacts of pilot devices can be either maintained or momentary.

Maintained Contact Pilot Devices

A maintained contact pilot device stays in its changed position after the actuating force is
removed. Standard toggle switches and selector switches, such as the ones shown in
Figure 11, are maintained pilot devices. When these devices are manually switched one
way or the other, they stay in that position until switched again.

Some push-button switches are classified as the maintained contact type because they
latch in one position when they are pushed once and become unlatched when they are
pushed a second time. This is similar to a latching relay that needs to be energized on and
then energized off.

Selector Switch Maintained Contact
Pushbutton

Figure 11 - Manually operated maintained contact pilot devices.



=== PAGE 14 ===
ip

Momentary Contact Pilot Devices
A standard push-button switch is an example of a momentary contact pilot devi
its contacts only remain in their changed position while the push button is
the button is released, the contacts revert to their original or normal condi

|

Presseq. When ()

ition,

The push button and the joystick shown in Figure 12 are momentary contact devi
These devices both have contacts that return to their original position when they Ices,
pushed or pressed. Fe not

Momentary Contact Joystick
Pushbutton Controller

Figure 12 - Manually operated momentary contact pilot devices.

(030204c02.docx



=== PAGE 15 ===
Objective Two Activity NOTES

1, What are the two (2) basic contact behaviour types used for pilot control devices? |
a)
b)

2. A start push-button switch used in parallel with holding contacts for a stop/start

station is a contact switch.

3. A standard single-pole toggle switch is a contact switch.



=== PAGE 16 ===
NOT

Objective Three
When you have completed this objective, you will be able to

Describe the operation of automatic pilot devices.

Automatic Pilot Devices a
Automatically operated pilot devices detect a change and convert this change to the
opening or closing of a set of contacts. These devices react automatically to changes
the conditions they are sensing and do not require a person to operate them,

in
Automatic pilot devices can be simple, such as pressure switches and float swit
They can also be the more complex black box variety, such as proximity switches,

photoelectric sensors, and ultrasonic transducers. These devices have internal ele
circuitry for their sensors.

Automatic pilot devices are designed to detect many forms of change, such as
«© Temperature,

Pressure,

Liquid levels,

Thickness of materials,

Light,

Rotation,

Specific gravity,

Vibration,

Linear movement, and

Flow of liquid.


=== PAGE 17 ===
Some examples of automatic pilot devices are shown in Figure 13

@ Temperature Pressure Limit

Photoelectric Inductive Capacitive Ultrasonic

Proximity Switches

Figure 13 - Automatic pilot devices.

Temperature Switches

A common example of switches that respond automatically to temperature are furnace
controls. Temperature switches are also a common component of control systems, such as
those for compressors, liquid baths, and fans. They can be used to detect the temperature
of bearings, motor windings, and ambient or compressed air or liquid.

There are a variety of temperature sensors, which include

© Thermocouples,
© Resistive temperature devices including resistance temperature detectors (RTDs)

and thermistors,
¢ Infrared sensors,
¢ Bimetallic devices, and
* Silicon diodes.

These sensors measure temperature by sensing a change in a physical characteristic.

030204c02.docx_



=== PAGE 18 ===
Thermocouples
Thermocouples are voltage devices that indicate temperature by producing a change f, a
voltage. As the temperature goes up, the output voltage of the thermocouple Tises, but Z
necessarily linearly. An example is a thermocouple used to confirm the Presence of g
pilot light in a boiler system before allowing the main gas valve to be energizeq,

Resistive Temperature Devices

Rather than using a voltage like the thermocouple, resistive temperature devices take
advantage of another characteristic of matter that changes with temperature: Tesistance,
The two types of resistive devices are
© Resistance temperature detectors (RTDs) and
e  Thermistors.

In general, RTDs are more linear than thermocouples. They have a positive temperature
coefficient, meaning that their resistance increases as the temperature rises. A thermistor _
is a semiconductive device with a negative temperature coefficient. Thermistors
experience a nonlinear decrease in resistance as temperature rises.

Infrared Sensors

Infrared sensors are non-contacting sensors, which means they do not need to touch the
surface being measured. This type of sensor measures the temperature of a surface by
virtue of its thermal radiation. Non-contact or thermal radiation temperature sensors
function by measuring components of the electromagnetic radiation naturally radiated by
all objects above absolute zero. eS

Since infrared sensors are non-contacting, they can be used for situations in which there
are contamination concerns, or in which the product being measured could be damaged
by a contact sensor. Infrared sensors can also be used to measure the temperature of
moving objects.

Bimetallic Devices

Bimetallic devices take advantage of the expansion of metals when they are heated.
In these devices, two metals are bonded together and mechanically linked toasetof
contacts. When heated, one side of the bimetallic strip expands more than the other,
causing the strip to bend. This movement changes the state of the contacts. When the -
strip cools, it returns to its initial shape and the contacts revert to their normal state.

A common example of this type of switch is non-programmable therm:

residential heating control. e

The advantages of bimetallic devices are portability and ind
supply and relatively low cost. However, they are not ust
as RTDs and thermocouples.

Silicon Diodes

Silicon diode sensors can be used over a wide
cryogenic temperature range, which is less than —
harsh temperatures whereas other types of t

'030204c02.docx


=== PAGE 19 ===
LS

0 SS ———— ai siisnasin
Pressure Switches

A typical pressure switch is a switch with both normally open and normally closed
contacts connected to an actuator. The actuator may be a bellows, a diaphragm, or a

piston, depending on the system in which the pressure is measured and depending on the
pressures involved. Some switches are dual-stage and operate contacts at two

predetermined pressures. The two stages could be an alarm stage and a shutdown stage.

Pressure switches used in pump and compressor applications often change the contact
position at one pressure and do not return them to the normal condition until a second
level is measured. For example, a pressure switch in an air compressor maintains air
pressure between two pre-set values by

e Closing at a low pressure to start the motor and
¢ Opening at a high pressure to turn off the motor.

Pressure switches can also be used to
¢ Signal a broken fan belt or clogged air filter,
e Prove exhaust flow by measuring the pressure differences across a barrier, or
« Operate contacts at a predetermined pressure differential.

Limit Switches and Proximity Switches

Limit switches and proximity switches have several applications, which include
e Measuring the travel of a piece of equipment for positioning,
e Stopping or changing directions, and
« Measuring the levels of solids in a container or pile.

@ Limit switches require the actuator, lever, cam, or rod to contact the object or material
being sensed. Proximity switches can detect the object or material without contacting it.
There are several designs of proximity switches such as

¢ Magnetic,

¢ Inductive,

¢ Capacitive, and
© Photoelectric.

Magnetic Proximity Switch

Magnetic proximity switches operate by detecting the presence of an external magnetic
field. They are often used in security systems to detect when doors or windows have been
opened. These switches can also be used in a hall effect sensor to detect the position or
speed of the rotor of a motor.

Inductive Proximity Switch

Inductive proximity switches operate by creating a magnetic field and then sensing
when a ferrous (conductive) metal object enters that field. A common example i SEDSOrS)
placed under the road construction materials at traffic lights to detect the presence

of vehicles. P



=== PAGE 20 ===
a

Capacitive Proximity Switch ; :
Capacitive proximity switches operate by creating an electrostatic field and then sensing
when an object enters that field. Since capacitive sensors can read through the walls of
enclosures, a common example is the level of liquids in a vessel.

Photoelectric Proximity Switch
Photoelectric proximity switches typically operate by
© Sensing light reflected off an object or
© Sensing when an object interrupts a light beam.

A common example is a photoelectric sensor and reflector installed on either side of g
garage door opening to stop the door from closing when there is an object that breaks the
path of the light beam.

Float Switches
Float switches, also called liquid-level switches, indicate the liquid level in a vessel or
tank. They can be a lever actuated by a mechanical float and rod, or a tethered bulb.
¢ The lever type operates the NO and NC contacts as changing liquid levels cause
the float to move.
¢ The tethered bulb type contains a switch within the float itself that is connected
to circuit wiring through a cable. The bulb is suspended at the desired level. If the
bulb changes position due to a liquid level change, the switch contact position
changes, as shown in Figure 14.

Siete ke High Level

aay >> Low Level

Figure 14 - Tethered bulb float switch in a ts

You may also encounter liquid level switches of the photoelectric
do not require a float or any direct contact with the liquid.

030204c02.docx



=== PAGE 21 ===
we

Basic Symbols for Automatic Controls

Figure 15 illustrates some common symbols for pilot devi open
@ symbols, the armature hangs below the terminal; 5 thea pc aemnally

symbols, the armature sits on the terminals. The:

Pressure Temperature]
Switch i

fe)

Figure 15 - Automatic pilot device symbols.

@ NOTE

The electrical industry generally indicates the normal position of. pilot
devices as its position in the absence of any operating medium.
However, the heating industry or appliance diagrams sometimes show
the position of temperature or pressure operated devices at the
expected levels during normal operation.

NOTES



=== PAGE 22 ===
a

Objective Three Activity
1. Automatically operated pilot devices detect a change and convert this change to th i
opening or closing of a set of contacts. €
a) True
b) False
2. List four (4) common types of pilot (switching) control devices.
a)

b)

°)
d)

3. When drawing a pressure switch in a diagram, the symbol is drawn as though there is
pressure in the system.
a) No
b) Full
c) Half
d) Rated

4. How isa tethered bulb float switch different than a lever type switch?

5. What is the difference between a limit switch and a proximity switch?

030204c02.docx



=== PAGE 23 ===
wee el

waa
objectives Four and Five
When you have completed these objectives, you will be able to

NOTES

Describe overcurrent protection devices,
Describe the protection characteristics of fuses and breakers,

Basic Protection Requirements

When current flows through conductors, the effects produced are
e Heat and
« Magnetism

Jf too much current, flows in a conductor, it can produce enough heat to damage the
conductor’s insulation. If a very high amount of current flows, the heat can even damage
the conductor itself. These scenarios are called overcurrent conditions.

Rule 14-010 of the CE Code requires conductors and associated equipment to be
protected against the damaging heat of overcurrent conditions.

Overcurrent Conditions

‘An overcurrent condition is an abnormal situation and can be caused by either
© Short circuits or
¢ Overloads.

NOTE

‘An overcurrent condition occurs when the current in the circuit
exceeds the circuit’s designed continuous capacity.

Short-Circuit Conditions

A short circuit occurs in a circuit if a live ungrounded conductor contacts
« Another ungrounded conductor,
« A grounded conductor, or
© Equipment that is bonded to ground.

This situation can be caused by insulation failure, an incorrectly connected wire, or a tool
dropped across the terminals of a device. A short circuit creates a fault path that bypasses
the load impedance that normally limits current flow. The amount of short-circuit current
or fault current that flows can be extremely high since the impedance of the short-circuit

path is typically very low. Following Ohm’s law, the current ina circuit increases if the
impedance of the circuit is reduced and the voltage remains the same.

Fault currents can be in the thousands of amps. Damage results
continues for even a few cycles of a 60 Hz supply. The high
result in severe insulation damage, melting conductors, 1
ionization, arcing, and fires if devices are not installed



=== PAGE 24 ===
Overload Conditions

An overload is a circuit condition in which the level of overcurrent isa moderate
percentage above the normal current for that circuit. Over time, an overload condition
generates enough heat in the conductors of the circuit to damage their insulation, An
overload condition could be created by adding too many loads to a circuit or bya single
load drawing too much current.

Increased current also occurs in motors with a mechanical overload. Overload currents
are typically only moderately higher than the rated current but can still be damaging to
insulation and conductors. If motors and other equipment do not have specific devices

that protect them from overload conditions, they can be permanently damaged by
prolonged overloading.

Overcurrent Devices

Section 0 of the CE Code defines an overcurrent device as any device capable of
automatically opening an electric circuit under both predetermined overload and

short-circuit conditions. They open the circuit by the fusing of metal or by
electromechanical means.

Overcurrent Device Ratings

In addition to a voltage rating, Rule 14-012 requires all overcurrent devices, fuses, and
circuit breakers to have two current ratings:

* Acontinuous current rating (for example, 15 A, 50 A, or 200 A) and

° An interrupting rating (for example, 10 000 A, 50 000 A, or 200 000 A).

Figure 16 shows the continuous current rating and interrupting rating of a circuit breaker.

Continuous
Current Rating

Interrupting
Rating

030204c02.docx



=== PAGE 25 ===
tinuous Current Rating
jnuous current rating, or simply continuous rating. indi
he continuous . “ ts ‘ating, indicates the amount of
ue rrent the device will carry without exceeding a specified temperature rise. Generally
he continuous current rating is sized from Table 13 in the CE Code based on the
0 f the conductors that the overcurrent d

ampacity ©} Os A device is protecting. The CE Code
requirements for determining the continuous ratings for overcurrent devices protecting
motor branch circuits will be discussed in detail in the Motor Starters module.

interrupting Rating ,

The interrupting rating indicates the maximum amount of current the device can safely
jnterrupt when it opens during a short-circuit condition. All Protective devices intended to
break short-circuit currents must have a short-circuit interrupting rating equal to or

greater than the maximum available fault current at their terminals. Interrupting ratings
typically do not exceed 200 000 A, although higher: ratings may be available.

The factors that affect the maximum available fault current in a system are discussed in
the next objective.

Types of Overcurrent Devices

The two basic types of overcurrent devices are
e Fuses (fusing of metal) and
e Circuit breakers (electromechanical).

Fuses

A fuse is a current-sensitive device that consists of a conductor of reduced cross-section,
called the element, surrounded by an arc quenching, heat-conducting material called
filler, as shown in Figure 17. These components are enclosed in a body fitted with end
contacts that are used to attach the fuse to a fuse holder. The element is sometimes called
the fuse link.

End Contact

Element

Body. Filler

NOTES



=== PAGE 26 ===
-

‘A fuse must carry its normal load current continuously without dete;

or overheating (passive functionality) and open the circuit under oy TOrating due to
(active functionality). “recurrent congiy
© During an overload condition, there is a gradual rise in cu Ons
causes the element to melt. trent that eventual
© During a short-circuit condition, the large fault current caus ly
much faster. €s the element om
It

The basic fuse shapes are plug fuses and cartridge fuses, with cartrid;
most common type used. Cartridge fuses come in various shapes mada fs being th,
in Figure 18. Sizes, as shown

N

Figure 18 - Cartridge fuses.

030204e02.docx



=== PAGE 27 ===
ictured in Figure 19, fit into a fuse holder r i
plug ser Plug fuses were once used as branch Bitch rite gs rn ee
taal panelboards; however, they have been replaced by the use of Gircuit breakers
q rally seen only in very old panelboards. Presently, plug fuses are common in ‘
eectical appliances such as electrical ranges. Plug fuses are covered in more detail in the
ears of your technical training.

el
later Y

Figure 19 - Plug fuses.

The two basic types of cartridge and plug fuses are
+ Non-time-delay fuses and
9 Time-delay fuses.

Non-Time-Delay Fuses
Non-time-delay fuses are pictured in Figure 20. Also called single-element fuses, this type

has a single element that opens quickly when the circuit current exceeds the current rating
of the fuse. Non-time-delay fuses do not allow for brief overloads and almost
immediately interrupt the circuit if the current rises above the continuous rating of

the fuse.

End Blades

Arc-quenching (Ferrules)

Filler Material

Figure 20 - Single-element fuse.



=== PAGE 28 ===
NOT

Overload Characteristics

If an overload current that exceeds the fuse’s rated current persists for m
time, the fuse link melts, as illustrated in Figure 21. An are across the an a shor
metal, widening the gap. The blown fuse cuts off all current flow in tite bums 6
material helps to suppress or quench the are. Meuit. The fille 0)

Figure 21 - An overload condition in a single-element fuse,

Short-Circuit Characteristics

During a short circuit, several sections of the element melt instantly, as shown in
Figure 22. The high short-circuit current may cause arcing across the vaporized
portions of the link but is extinguished by the filler material. The total operating time
of non-time-delay fuses during short-circuit conditions can be less than half of one
electrical cycle (less than %oo9 of a second). Very high short-circuit currents can be
cleared in less than a quarter of a cycle. This fast-clearing time protects system
components from damage.

Figure 22 - A short-circuit condition in a single-element fuse.

Time-Delay Fuses

Time-delay fuses, also called dual-element fuses, have two parts:
e A thermal cut-out and
e A fuse element or link.

The thermal cut-out responds with inverse-time characteristics to overload Co
¢ The higher the value of the overload current, the less time it takes
open the circuit. p J
The lower the value of the overload current, the lo
open the circuit. =

These fuses provide a time-delayed response for
continuous current of the fuse. The time-delayed re
circuits such as motor branch circuits that have ah

time they are started. The fuse link of the time:
short-circuit currents or fault currents above thi

(030204c02.docx


=== PAGE 29 ===
Short-circuit
Element

Thermal Cutout

(Overload Element)

Arc-quenching
Filler Material

Figure 23 - Dual-element fuse.

NOTE

Manufacturers may use methods different than those described for the
construction and arrangement of the short-circuit and overload
elements; however, the basic time-delay characteristics are the same.

Overload Characteristics

For a small overload current, the short-circuit fuse link remains inactive. The overload
element (thermal cut-out) consists of a centre mass of copper on which a spring and a
short connector are mounted. This connector is held in place by a low melting point
solder, and it connects the centre mass of copper to the fuse link. When an overload
current flows long enough to melt the solder, the connector is pulled out of place by the
spring, opening the circuit as portrayed in Figure 24.

Figure 24 - An overload condition in a dual-element fuse.

The time that it takes to heat up and melt the solder provides a built-in time-delay for the
thermal cut-out element. This permits momentary inrush currents and expected overload
Conditions to occur without opening the fuse.



=== PAGE 30 ===
28

Short-Circuit Characteristics ‘ ;
During a short circuit, the fuse link portion of the time-delay fuse acts like g

single-element fuse. One ot more portions ofthe link vaporize, and the suirouy

arc-quenching filler extinguishes any arcing current, as shown in Figure 25, rae
faster than the time it would take for the thermal cut-out to melt, “This happens

Figure 25 - A short-circuit condition in a dual-element fuse,

Circuit Breakers

Circuit breakers are electromechanical devices that can be operated manually to
de-energize a circuit and can also operate automatically in response to overcurrent
conditions. A circuit breaker may be used as a protective device, a control device, and/or
a disconnecting means. Like fuses, they come in a variety of sizes and shapes, as pictured
in Figure 26.

Figure 26 - Circuit breakers.

The two basic types of circuit breakers are
¢ Instantaneous-trip circuit breakers and
©  Inverse-time circuit breakers.

Instantaneous-Trip Circuit Breakers
Instantaneous-trip circuit breakers only respond to short-circuit conditions. Like
non-time-delay fuses, they respond very quickly when the circuit current exceeds
the continuous current rating of the circuit breaker.

(030204c02.docx

